It is one of the harshest things you can do. Why it is still necessary to face reality every now and then.

# Facing Reality

(Note: this article is still in review. I will make it easier to read in due time)


Are you living in Reality? When asked this question, the immediate answer is "Yes", because what else should it be? I'd say, no, no one lives in Reality. The reason is simple, our brain is far from perfect, and everything it is capable of is showing us a simulation of what it believes is happening (On that note, [consciousness is the lie the brain tells itself][consciousness], but there will be a post for that at some point). Everything we are capable of 'seeing' are the error-corrected patterns our brain is used to. And honestly, why should it do more, this is already constrained since it requires a whole lot of energy (on average about 20% of the energy spent is in the brain, 6% of the mass). So the brain tries to create models about the world and 'lives' in them. Where do they come from?

We might get them through up to two different means. Well, fundamentally it is the same process, but the 'how' is different. The brain is in some regards similar to a bayesian judge, creating a hypothesis and testing it against the current amount of evidence available. Also, continuously updating it, at least until a certain degree of congruency with the perceived world is achieved. This happens e.g. When you try to learn a new language and in the beginning do not even recognize the sounds (e.g. as an englishman trying to learn chinese, japanese, korean, ...). If someone said a sentence to you in one of these languages (if you are not familiar with them!) you would not be able to remember it easily, as there is no representation for the individual sounds yet. Same for written text, it might be easily recognizable as being from one of these languages, but if you are not fluent with them, it is hard to repeat (write) something that you have seen just a few seconds prior, as it is not possible for the brain to efficiently 'chunk' in small enough pieces it can remember.

The other way is that someone tells you. By telling you, specific new beliefs, new representations (with [expectations][expect]) form in your brain, and you can directly ask about things that were unclear before. This is mainly what is done in schools. In universities (at least in scientific majors) it is more common to have a 'figure it out yourself' approach. This way, you test more potential hypothesis and improve your heuristics for searching and validating hypothesis much more.

But anyways, in the end, everything the brain is capable of 'seeing' are the stabilized patterns previously learnt, though maybe in new combinations. After all, the brain tries to minimize confusion in every possible moment.

Now, whatever these beliefs, these patterns, these theories, hypotheses are, they describe the world quite well in regard to what you see. Or at least, sufficiently well. And therein lies the point: it is always unclear if they could be improved upon. Can you improve upon your way of reading, to read faster and comprehend more? Can you improve upon your way of speaking, to be more concise, and to mutter less whilst speaking louder? Can you improve upon your model of Reality? The answer to all of these is 'probably yes', even though a clear path on how to do it is hard to be seen.

However, there is one proven way to improve ones model of reality. It is by facing reality, and noticing 'errors' in the currently prevelant models. And doing this might be as simple as getting out of your usual 'day-to-day' environment. If you are the boss of a big company, this might be as simple as registering yourself as the new trainee somewhere in your own company (maybe with a different name though) (maybe a lower manager, depending on circumstances ...), if your company is big enough for your face not to be known everywhere. It is quite likely that you learn a whole bunch of things, that were never written in your reports. You get to hear how the lowest-level employees think about the upper management, what kind of things don't go the way they would like, and how and why they do put them in the reports. Do not blame your subordinates though, If you would only _want_ them to act differently, because it is likely you would act in a similar way in their position. They are not to blame, not for these things.

In my experience, every bigger company has their share of problems the upper management 'does not want to be aware of' as well. 











[consciousness]
[expect](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/a7n8GdKiAZRX86T5A/making-beliefs-pay-rent-in-anticipated-experiences)













